Dynamic structural evolution of overlying strata during shallow coal seam longwall mining
Chenlong Wanga, Changsuo Zhanga , Xiaodong Zhaob, Lin Liaoa, Shengli Zhang
Keywords: 
Particle Flow Code; Shallow coal seam; Longwall mining; Roof structure evolution; Roof step-form subsidence
1. Introduction 
The mining depth at the Shendong coal mine in the Northwestern region of China is typically 50–250 m. The typical characteristics of the coal seams include shallow burial depths, thin bedrocks, and thick unconsolidated quaternary layers. It has also been observed from practice that roof step-form subsidence and chock closure failure disasters often occur during the weighting periods. In most cases, the broken main roof is hardly capable of sustaining itself, with its movement often affecting the ground surface, resulting in discontinuous subsidence and the formation of obvious graben on the ground surface. If the mining activities induces severe roof step-form subsidence, coalescence of open cracks along the palisades may occur, with the consequent formation of penetrating passageways through which water and sand may rush in, resulting in a water and sand inrush disaster on the working face. The rush in of underground water unto the working face causes soil and water loss, vegetation damage, and desertification in the vicinity, as shown in Fig. 1. Coal mine roof disasters constitute serious safety threats in mining practice. Incomplete statistics show that 12 support failure incidents have occurred since 2007 in the Shendong shallow coalfifield longwall mining area, with the direct asset loss amounting to more than $15 million.4 Because of the obvious roof behavior, a longwall mining coal seam is generally referred to as a typical shallow coal seam to distinguish it from other types of coal seams. Conventional strata control mechanisms and theories do not adequately explain the special roof movement characteristics of a shallow coal seam, because a conventional roof gradually caves layerby-layer from the bottom to the top. It is, therefore, of great theoretical and practical significance to investigate the form and stability of the roof-bearing structure of a shallow coal seam under longwall mining, in order to determine the fundamental mechanism of roof step-form subsidence and implement necessary safety measures to avert such disasters. 
The core problem of ground pressure and strata control is the clarification of the movement principles of the overlying strata during coal extraction under different geological conditions. Numerous relevant studies have been conducted from different perspectives, and valuable results have been obtained with regard to shallow coal seams. Ju et al. investigated the mechanism of longwall chock support failure in the Shendong shallow coalfield when the working face of the lower coal seam underpasses the coal pillars left in the upper coal seam. The study involved a stability analysis of key blocks above the coal pillars, and the findings were used to propose some preventative measures. Hou suggested a combinatorial key stratum theory of the synchronous movement of the full thickness overlying strata in a shallow coalfifield. Huang noted that roof step-form subsidence under shallow coalfield longwall mining was caused by the instability of the single key stratum structure in the overlying strata. The researcher used "short block voussoir beam" and "step voussoir beam" models to explain the behavior during main roof periodic weighting, and proposed support resistance for the control of roof sliding. However, Hou8 believed that a voussoir beam could not be formed in a shallow coal seam, because the size of the ruptured rock blocks could not satisfy the requirement for a voussoir beam, namely, a block length that is more than twice the block thickness. Yang9 used the initial post-buckling theory to discuss the breaking mechanism of the roof structure of a shallow coalfield under longwall mining, and used the catastrophe theory to examine the unstable movement of the structure. These previous studies have contributed to understanding strata movements in shallow coal seams. The roof-bearing structure undergoes a dynamic evolution process with the advancement of the longwall face, representing a special engineering phenomenon. The structural form, structural components, and structural mechanicalcharacteristics vary with time, the mining method, the geological conditions, and the powered support performances. However, the roof-bearing structure of a shallow coal seam is still not fully understood, and there is the need for further investigation of the interaction and relationship between the roof behavior and the support resistance. 
Numerical analysis, physical modelling, field observation, and numerical simulation have all been used to investigate the dynamic structural evolution of the overlying strata under longwall mining. However, due to the complexity of the lithology and its combination relationships, there have been only a few analytical studies, with available classical research results mainly obtained by field tests and physical similar simulation tests. In addition, most of the available analytical solutions are based on multiple preconditions, with the employed simplifications exaggerating the effects of some major factors on the outcomes. Overall, physical modelling and field observations are the most important approaches to investigating the dynamic structural evolution of overlying strata. Physical similar simulation tests have particularly afforded substantial insight into the complicated breaking mechanism of the roof structure of a coal seam. A physical similar simulation model is constructed based on the in-situ characteristics of the overlying strata. To facilitate stress and strain measurements, the materials used to construct the model differ from those of the actual overburden. Dimensional analysis and the similarity principle are used to design the model and correlate the test results to the prototype. Although physical similar simulation tests enable reproduction of the dynamic structural evolution of the overlying strata, the accuracy of the results is limited by many factors, the major ones being (1) difficulty of accurately matching the material properties; (2) difficulty of accurately reproducing the mining-induced stress field, due to the effects of friction between the model and the clapboards of the similar simulation test bed; and (3) artificial uncertainties introduced during the model construction process. 
Numerical simulation is increasingly being used to investigate the dynamic structural evolution of the overlying strata of a coal seam. It enables reproduction of the typical roof behaviors and establishment of some underlying principles. However, considering that numerical models are interpretations and simplifications of reality, their indications require validation by physical modelling or field observation. The movement of the overlying strata of a shallow coal seam under longwall mining constitutes a major discontinuous deformation problem. 
Numerical simulation analysis based on a continuous medium is not suitable for solving this problem and cannot be used to accurately track the dynamic propagation of the mining-induced fractures. Compared with numerical simulation analysis based on a continuous medium, the greatest advantage of the use of Particle Flow Codes (PFC2D and PFC3D) is that it enables reproduction of the entire roof movement process, from the unaffected continuum state up to breaking, caving, accumulating, and compaction. The use of Particle Flow Codes (PFCs) is thus more suitable for investigating the dynamic structural evolution of the overlying strata of a shallow coal seam under longwall mining. PFCs have been used to study many rock mechanics problems on a laboratory scale. The studies have contributed to understanding the relationships between the microscopic and macroscopic mechanical behaviors of small specimens. Unfortunately, such relationships for field-scale mining practice remain very limitedly understood. Behbahani et al. examined the unloading scheme of the Angooran mine slope in the northwest of Iran by using PFC2D to monitor the velocity and displacement during the unloading stages of the sliding mass. Esmaieli et al. used a PFC3D synthetic rock mass (SRM) model to investigate the failure mechanism of the 19A Ore Pass at the Brunswick Mine in Canada under a high stress. Juncal et al. examined the effect of preconditioning on primary fragmentation in veined hard rocks through a series of PFC2D simulations of hypothetic scenarios of the veined hard rock mass of the E1 Teniente mine. Liu et al. used PFC2D to investigate the effect of the backfilling waste-rock layer on ore loss and ore drawing dilution during a change from open-pit mining to underground mining. Lorig et al. comprehensively reviewed the application and development of discrete fracture network (DFN)—the backbone of the SRM technique—in both mining and civil engineering, highlighting the challenges of applying DFN to mining and civil geomechanics. Paredes Otoya and Barreto Da Fontoura used a PFC2D SRM model to evaluate the slope stability of an open-pit mine in Peru, and showed that the progressive slope failure was well simulated by the model. Wang et al. used PFC2D to examine the caving characteristics of the overlying strata of No. 7435 Face of the Kongzhuang coal mine, China, to determine the height of the gas conducting fracture zone. They found that PFC2D accurately simulated the overlying strata caving behavior. Wang et al. explored the mechanism of top-coal caving using PFC2D. Li and Wang used PFC2D simulation to investigate mine subsidence in Shandong province of China and demonstrated the feasibility of using the procedure to simulate large deformations. Compared with those of small laboratory-scale specimens, the macromechanical behaviors encountered in field-scale mining engineering are more complex. A field-scale mining engineering model should therefore possess the following two features for effective use in guiding safe mining: (1) The model should reflect the fracture position in the main roof as accurately as possible, in order to afford a basis for the selection and design of the required support, (2) The model should effectively reproduce the roof-bearing structure and the effect of the bearing structure instability on the development of the mining-induced fractures, which constitute the origin of the roof pressure. 
To determine the mechanism of roof step-form subsidence caused by longwall mining in the Shendong shallow coalfield, the Daliuta 1203 longwall face of the Shendong shallow coal mine was investigated in the present study using a PFC2D model of the overlying strata. The deformation, fracture, caving, and compaction of the overlying strata were analyzed. The fundamental mechanism of the roof step-form subsidence was examined through deformation analysis of a mechanical model of the overlying strata comprising two hard layers, and longwall mining simulations that reproduced the dynamic evolution of the roof-bearing structure. A reasonable method for determining the support capacity was also developed. The major contribution of this work is an interpretation of roof step-form subsidence based on microscopic simulation, thus affording a deeper understanding of how the overlying strata response translates to support resistance in a Shendong shallow coal seam under longwall mining. The findings of this study can be used as reference for the application of PFCs to mining under other geological conditions. 
2. Typical roof step-form subsidence disasters 
2.1. Case  
The Daliuta C202 longwall face of the Shendong coalfield had a cover depth of ~65 m, designed advance length of ~1500 m, designed width of 102 m, designed mining height of 2.2 m, advancing footage of 1.2 m per mining cycle, and coal seam average thickness of 3.8 m with a 1° average dip angle. The immediate roof was primarily composed of siltstone and mudstone and was 4.35 m thick. The main roof mainly comprised medium-grained sandstone of thickness 17.3 m. HZWA-type frictional props and HDJA-1200-type articulated roof beams were used to support the roof with a row spacing of 1.2 m and column spacing of 0.6 m. Following is a summary of the strata movement behaviors, based on field observation: (1) The first weighting interval of the main roof was 24 m, and the average periodic weighting interval was 7.7 m. (2) Sudden shrink of the frictional props, roof step-form subsidence along the coal face, and partial roof falling all occurred. (3) The amount of roof step-form subsidence along the coal face during the weighting stage was about 350–600 mm, and the maximum subsidence occurred at the middle of the longwall face.
Fig. 1. Surface fracture distribution after longwall mining
Table 1 
Lithology of the 1203 longwall panel.
2.2. Case 2 
The Daliuta 1203 longwall face of the Shendong coalfield had a cover depth of 50–65 m, designed advance length of ~1500 m, width of 150 m, designed mining height of 4 m, advancing footage of 0.8 m per mining cycle, and coal seam average thickness of 6 m with a 3° average dip angle. The bedrock thickness ranged between 15 and 40 m. The ground surface was covered with an unconsolidated sand layer of thickness 15–30 m. The immediate roof was mainly siltstone and mudstone, while the main roof was mainly sandstone. Table 1 gives the lithology of the mine at the 1203 longwall working face. Based on the traditional strata control mechanisms and theories of common longwall mining, a shield type hydraulic support YZ3500-23/45 was employed with a setting load of 2700 kN and capacity of 3500 kN. Following is a summary of the strata movement behaviors, based on field observation: 
(1) The first weighting interval of the main roof was 27 m, and the roof at the middle of the working face was cut down by about 91 m along the coal face during the main roof first weighting. The roof step-form subsidence was observed and the roof pressure was found to be severe, crushing some supports. (2) The periodic weighting interval was approximately ~9.4–15 m, with an average value of 12 m. During the periodic weighting, the support resistance increased rapidly, resulting in rapid shrinking of the legs of the powered support. The roof pressure was gentle compared with that of the first weighting. However, many support legs still burst open due to the dynamic load effect. (3) A graben of height ~20 cm was formed on the ground surface after the first weighting, indicating that the major cracks propagated through the ground surface. A similar phenomenon occurred during the periodic weighting. (4) The roof step-form subsidence was caused by the entire thickness strata cut down along the faceline, and there were mostly two zones of overlying strata movement, namely, the caved zone and fractured zone. 
From the above cases, it is obvious that roof step-form subsidence in the Shendong shallow coalfield often occurs during the weighting stages of longwall mining. The roof disasters constitute a major factor that affects safe and efficient mining in the coalfield. If the dynamic evolution of the roof-bearing structure can be clarified, the fundamental mechanism of the roof step-form subsidence could be established. 
3. Mechanism of roof step-form subsidence 
Based on the geological conditions of the Daliuta 1203 longwall face of the Shendong coalfield, the roof step-form subsidence during weighting periods can be investigated by assessing the ability of the hard strata to form a combinatorial beam. Because there are two hard layers in the overlying strata of the longwall face, it is assumed that the bedrocks cover n layers, with the first and + (m th 1) layers being hard layers, and the ground surface is covered with a thick unconsolidated sand layer that applies a load q, as shown in Fig. 2. If the load q of the unconsolidated sand layer is large, the two hard layers would be forced to deform synchronously, i.e. the deformation curvature of the second hard layer ( + (m th 1) layer) would be equal to or greater than that of the first hard layer6 , as expressed by Eq. (1):
#E
Because the movement of the first to mth layer is controlled by the first hard layer, the layers deform synchronously and integrally. Hence, the first to mth layer form a combinatorial beam, as expressed by Eq. (2):
#E
The bending moment in each section of the fixed-end combinatorial beam is supported by the component layers of the beam:
#E
where M1 can be obtained from Eqs. (2) and (3):
#E
Considering that the movements of the + (m th 1) to nth layers are controlled by the second hard layer, Mm+1 can be similarly obtained:
#E
From Eqs. (1), (3), (4), (5), and (6), the following can be obtained:
#E
where = M i n ( 1, 2, 3, ..., ) i is the bending moment of the ith layer; = E i n ( 1, 2, 3, ..., ) i is the elastic modulus of the ith layer; = J i n ( 1, 2, 3, ..., ) i is the inertial moment of the ith layer; = h i n i( 1, 2, 3, ..., ) is the thickness of the ith layer; = γi n ( 1, 2, 3, ..., ) i is the bulk density of the ith layer; and Ma and Mb are respectively the bending moments in the two sections of the fixed-end combinatorial beam formed by the first to mth layer and the + (m th 1) to nth layer. The properties of the overlying strata of the Daliuta 1203 longwall face satisfy Eq. (7), which implies that the gravity load of the second hard layer and the layers above it is borne by the first hard layer. Thus, the entire thickness of the overlying strata moves together and integrally. In this case, the first hard layer is a key stratum and controls the movement of the entire thickness of the overlying strata, constituting the main geological source of the heavy roof pressure.
Fig. 2. Overlying strata model of shallow coal seam modified after Hou.
4. Numerical simulation investigation 
4.1. Model configuration 
Based on the geometry of the Daliuta 1203 longwall face, the ratio of the first weighting interval of the main roof to the panel width is 0.18, while the ratio of the periodic weighting interval of the main roof to the panel width is within 0.06–0.1. Hence, a 200×28 m2 PFC2D numerical model of the midspan of the longwall face along its width direction was built, as shown in Fig. 3. A total of 798 measurement circles of radius 0.625 m in the model were used to monitor the stress changes at different mining stages. The distance between the setup entry and the left edge of the model was 40 m. The left and right boundaries limited horizontal movement but permitted vertical movement. Conversely, the bottom boundary limited vertical movement but allowed horizontal movement, while the top boundary was a force boundary. The model was used to simulate the longwall mining process, with advancement from the left to the right and a mining height of 4 m. 
All the layers of the model had the same particle size distribution. The model contained a total of 468,844 particles. Considering the significant runtime required to set this large number of particles to attain an equilibrium state, bricks were used to construct the large model. A brick is a set of compacted particles generated in a periodic space and stored in a compact equilibrium state. When a model is constructed from such already equilibrated bricks, no further time is required to set the large number of particles to attain an equilibrium state during the model generation. This enables the assembly of a large equilibrated model almost instantaneously. Once the present model was assembled from the bricks, in-situ stresses were applied and a global equilibrium was established. The unconsolidated sand layer was directly converted into an equivalent force, which was applied on the particles at the top of the model. Gravity was applied. The initial horizontal secondary stress was temporarily not considered because of the shallow cover depth of the Daliuta 1203 longwall face, and considering that the weakening effect of the roof step-form subsidence occurred in other mined out areas at the same mining level on the initial horizontal secondary stress. After an equilibrium among the applied initial stresses was established, the longwall mining simulation was conducted. 
The advancement of a working face causes the roof to bend, break, collapse, and pile up on the floor. The isolated particles that fall under gravity are usually removed during cycling because the time required to achieve global equilibrium is significantly increased by these isolated falling particles. In the present study, however, the isolated falling particles were not removed when the roof collapsed, in order to reproduce the situation in the field. A local damping coefficient of 0.7 was used to simulate the roof bending, fracturing and fragmentation processes. When roof fragments were isolated and fell under gravity, the local damping coefficient was set to 0.0. A linear contact model was assigned to all the new contacts between particles formed by the impact of the fragments with the floor and between fragments. A viscous damping represented by a ratio of the damping constant to the critical damping constant of 0.2 was used to dissipate additional kinetic energy. After a certain runtime, the translational and rotational velocities of the caved particle piles were set to zero, and a local damping coefficient of 0.7 was assigned to the particles. The model was subsequently solved to achieve equilibrium, and the next stage in the advancement of the longwall face was then implemented. To define the model in equilibrium after each mining stage, at least one of the following criterions should be satisfied: (1) Convergence of the stress in measurement circles, as shown in Fig. 3. (2) The average ratio (i.e., the ratio of the average sum of the contact force and body force for all the bodies to the total sum of the applied force and body force of all the bodies) should be less than or equal to 0.0001. (3) No obvious support shrinkage. (4) No obvious variation of the support resistance. (5) The fracture growth rate should be less than or equal to 5 per 1000 calculation steps. We found that it was very difficult to satisfy the requirement of an average ratio of less than or equal to 0.0001 when the longwall face continued to advance after the main roof first weighting. The requirement was therefore relaxed to 0.001.
Fig. 3. Overlying strata model of the 1203 longwall panel.
Fig. 4. Difference between parallel bond contact interface and flat joint contact interface. (a) Epoxy-cemented glass beads from Holt et al. (b) Marble image fromBandini et al. (c) Difference between parallel bond contact interface and flat joint contact interface after bond failure redrawn after Potyondy. (d) Flat joint materials of interlocked grain modeled with four fully unbonded flat joint contacts from Potyondy. Compressive forces develop at the far end of each flat jointed interface to resist the moment applied to the central particle so that even the fully unbonded interface continues to resist relative rotation.
4.2. Microscopic parameters used in model 
Prior to 2012, parallel-bond contact model was typically used to investigate fracturing and fragmentation processes in brittle rocks. This contact bond model reproduces the microstructure of glass beads cemented with epoxy (Fig. 4(a)). However, one limitation of the contact bond model is the unrealistically low ratio of the simulated uniaxial compressive strength to the tensile strength (within 3–5), due to the inability of circular or spherical particles to accurately reproduce the actual complex shapes and interlocked grain structures. When a parallel bond breaks, it is removed and the contact between the particles no longer resists the relative rotation that restricts the peak load during an unconfined compression test. This limitation has nevertheless been overcome by the development of a flat-joint contact model. A flatjoint contact model replicates the microstructure of angular, interlocked grains, which are typical of hard rocks, as well as the macroscopic behavior of a finite-size, linear elastic, and bonded/frictional interface that is capable of surviving partial damage (Fig. 4(b)). The interface is discretized into elements, with the breakage of any element contributing to the partial damage of the interface. After the breakage of a flat-joint contact bond element, it continues to resist relative rotation, resulting in increased peak load during an unconfined compression test. The differences between a parallel bond contact interface and a flat joint contact interface before and after bond failure are illustrated in Fig. 4(c) and (d). Thus, the flat-joint contact bond model was used in the present work. 
The intact properties of the coal measures are presented in Table 1. Rock is a complex natural medium, containing defects of different scales that have been bred under the long-term effects of various external loads and environmental factors. The strength and deformation of rocks generally have a size effect. Scaling of the deformation modulus of an intact rock to that of a rock mass can be accomplished using the following empirical relationship:
#E
where Ei is the Young's modulus of the intact rock; Erm is the deformation modulus of the rock mass; D is the disturbance factor, which is simply set as 0.0 before mining based on the selection guidelines; and GSI is the Geological Strength Index. 
The uniaxial compressive strength and tensile strength can respectively be determined by the following equations:
#E
where σmc is the uniaxial compressive strength; σmt is the tensile strength; and mb, s and a are constants of the rock mass. The present scaled rock mass properties are presented in Table 2. A sample aspect ratio of 1:2 was used for the calibration of the microscopic parameters of each layer, with the height equal to the thickness of the corresponding layer in the model. The calibration microscopic parameters of the different layers are presented in Table 3. The mechanical properties of the target rock masses and the Bonded-Particle Models (BPMs) are presented in Table 4. 
In this work, the calibration generally produced a lower UCS of the BPM compared with that of the target rock mass. However, the TS and E of the BPM basically matched the values for the target rock mass. Because the purpose of the present study was to investigate the overlying strata movement, the brittle failure of the strata under the condition was dominated by tensile rupture under gravity. The effects of the UCS on the roof bending, fracturing and fragmentation processes were not evident. In addition, the UCS/TS of the BPM was generally larger than, which is characteristic of a brittle rock. A higher UCS/TS could be achieved by assigning a certain proportion of gapped and slit unbonded flat-joint contacts to the total flat-joint contacts. A higher confidence in the calibrated model could also be achieved by using smaller particles, clump and grain-based models.
Table 2 
Scaled rock mass properties.
4.3. Method for constructing powered support 
The support canopy was built using a clump, with no other support part considered. To accurately simulate the support performance, the following strategies were adopted: (1) Setting stage: Two or more stages were used to apply the setting force to the canopy clump to avoid unrealistic damage of the immediate roof by sudden loading, (2) Steady increase stage: The position of the canopy clump was fixed after setting, and the resistance was gradually increased with the bending and sagging of the roof, (3) Stabilizing stage: When the support resistance was greater than its yield load, the fixed position condition of the canopy clump was removed, and the yield load was applied to the canopy clump, (4) Crushing stage: The positon of the canopy clump was once again fixed when its vertical displacement exceeded the maximum allowable limit. 
Considering the bottom surface of the immediate roof layer of the model was uneven, it was difficult to directly build a canopy clump with the top surface in good contact with the bottom surface of the immediate roof. Moreover, failure to adequately consider the contact between the canopy clump and the immediate roof would likely result in stress concentration, which is unconducive to force-transmission between the canopy clump and the immediate roof. The canopy clump was therefore built by setting a certain thickness of particles at the top of the coal layer in the initial model before mining, based on the position and length of the canopy. This was done to guarantee good contact between the canopy clump and immediate roof, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
Table 3 
Microscopic parameters for numerical simulation.
Table 4 
Mechanical properties of the target rock masses and the BPMs.
Fig. 5. Immediate roof first caved when the advancement of the longwall face over 14 m.
Fig. 6. Overlying strata structure when the advancement of the longwall face over 22 m. (a) Three-hinged arch structure. (b) Contact force chain.
Fig. 7. Dynamic evolution of overlying strata during the main roof first weighting. (a) Initial stage. (b) Earlier stage. (c) Medium stage. (d) Later stage. (e) Quasi-terminal stage. (f) Terminal stage.
5. Numerical simulation results and discussion 
5.1. Main roof first weighting 
5.1.1. Evolution of roof bearing structure 
With the advancement of the longwall face over 14 m, the two lower layers of the immediate roof first caved with caving angle of 54° and caving height of 4.6 m. This resulted in the formation of a stable threehinged arch structure in the top layer of the immediate roof, as shown in Fig. 5. The coal extraction provided free space for the bending and sagging of the immediate roof. When the face had advanced 22 m, the top layer of the immediate roof also caved, and the mining induced fractures were mainly distributed under the hard H6 layer, implying that the H3, H4, and H5 layers underwent combinatorial movement. These three latter layers together formed a three-hinged arching structure, with each of them forming a force-transmitting strata beam structure, as shown in Fig. 6. In addition, the height of mushroom-shaped stress increase area shown in Fig. 6(b) reached the top of H7 layer.
The main roof first weighting arrived when the face had advanced 28 m. Fig. 7 shows the strata movement at different stages in response to the main roof first weighting. At the initial stage, the rotation of the rock blocks was aggravated by the stress concentration at the compression positions, resulting in the instability of the entire three-hinged arch structure and the propagation of the mining induced fractures to the upper H6 layer. The force-transmitting strata beam of the H3 layer slid and caved at its two ends under a shear force. This resulted in the generation of an obvious shear crack that ran through the H4 forcetransmitting strata beam, due to compression of the rock blocks. The degree of fragmentation of the H5 layer was higher owing to its small free space and weak strength. In addition, an arch shear crack propagated through the three-hinged arch structure of the H6 layer, and longitudinal tensile cracks grew at the front-top of the longwall face and the setup entry (on the left hand side of the longwall, as simulated). During the earlier stage, the load of the overlying strata was mainly borne by the H6, H7, and H8 layers due to the failure of the entire hinged-arch structure formed by H3, H4, and H5. The H6 layer and its controlled H7 and H8 layers were incapable of bearing the overburden load, resulting in the failure of the H6 force-transmitting strata beam structure and the propagation of mining induced fractures to the top of the H8 layer. Obviously, the stability of the hinged-arch structure played a major role in controlling the propagation of the mining induced fractures. Fig. 7(b) shows that the failure modes of the H6, H7, and H8 layers were mainly shear failure and tensile failure in the middle-lower part. Overall, the mining induced fractures were archedshaped. In the medium stage, the H6 collapsed, and this compounded the destruction of the H7 and H8 layers, with the mining induced fractures gradually propagating outward. In the later stage, the overall shape of the mining induced fractures changed into trapezoidal due to the intense development of those in H6, H7, and H8 layers. In addition, the severe damage of these three layers above the goaf weakened the lateral restraint on both sides of the layers, with gradual deeper development of the longitudinal tensile cracks at the front-top of the longwall face and the setup entry (on the left hand side of the longwall, as simulated). At the quasi-terminal stage, the overburden stratum was cut down over its entire thickness with an almost 90° fracture angle. The subsidence of the top H8 layer was about 3.35 m. The final equilibrated state in the terminal stage is shown in Fig. 7(f). The average subsidence of the bedrocks was about 4.4 m, with only the caved zone existing in the overlying strata after the longwall mining. Because the longitudinal tensile crack F2 at the front-top of the setup entry was close to the caving face, the lateral restraint on it was weaker, resulting in its development depth being greater than that of the longitudinal tensile crack F1 at the front-top of the longwall face. The characteristics of the first weighting in the current simulation agreed well with the physical modelling and the field observations of the surface fractures, as shown in Fig. 8(a)–(c). The surface fracture distribution about 14 h after the main roof fifirst weighting was approximately ellipsoidal with a long axis of 53 m parallel to longwall face, and a short axis of 22 m almost in the middle of the longwall face. This indicates that the major cracks extended long enough to cut through the entire thickness of the overlying strata and the ground surface at the arrival of the main roof first weighting. 
The hard H3 layer and its upper strata exhibited almost synchronous movement, with the hard H3 layer being the key stratum that controlled the movement of the entire thickness of the overlying strata. The cut down of the entire thickness of the strata along the faceline was the inevitable consequence of the collapse of the force-transmitting strata beam structure in the hard H3 layer. The instability of the three-hinged arch structure formed by the H3, H4, and H5 layers caused the mininginduced fractures to propagate to the upper layers. This resulted in the overburden strata load being borne by the second hard H6 layer and its controlled H7 and H8 layers. Because it was difficult for the hingedarch structure formed by the H6, H7, and H8 layers to bear the overburden load, it immediately lost its stability with the collapse of the hinged-arch structure formed by the H3, H4, and H5 layers, eventually leading to the cut down of the entire thickness of the overburden strata. The main roof first weighting had a single key stratum structure, and the entire thickness of the overburden strata moved together. This was the root source of the heavy roof pressure on the 1203 longwall face at the arrival of the main roof first weighting.
Fig. 8. Characteristics of the main roof first weighting and periodic weighting. (a) First weighting in the physical model. (b) First weighting sketch in the physical model3 . (c) Surface fracture distribution about 14 h after the main roof first weighting. (Blue numbers indicate height difference between the two sides of fractures; red numbers indicate the depth of collapse pits; the length unit in the figure is m.) (d) Periodic weighting in the physical model. (e) Surface fracture distribution after the main roof periodic weighting. (Due to the measured elevation data are unavailable, height difference between the two sides of fractures are not marked; the length unit in the figure is m.).
5.1.2. Abutment pressure distribution 
The collapse of the hinged arch structure of the roof caused stress redistribution in the surrounding strata. The variation of the abutment pressure directly reflected the dynamic evolution of the overburden structure, and a comprehension of the variation would afford deeper understanding of the strata movement. The measured abutment pressure at different advancing distances is shown in Fig. 9. The measurement circles of radius 0.625 m shown in Fig. 3 were individually positioned and spaced at 2 m at the bottom of the coal seam on both sides of the setup entry. 
Fig. 9 clearly shows that the stability of the roof hinged structure affects the front abutment pressure. When the structure was stable, it effectively transferred the overburden load to both sides of the longwall face. Prior to the arrival of the main roof first weighting, the front abutment pressure gradually increased with the advancement of the face, and the position of maximum front abutment pressure gradually moved deeper. The front abutment pressure decreased exponentially away from the faceline until it returned to the overburden pressure at some distance. The maximum front abutment pressure before the arrival of the main roof first weighting was 1.86 MPa, which corresponds to 1.72 times the overburden pressure. This is consistent with the observations of physical modelling.34,36 However, the traditional models suggest that the maximum abutment pressure is on the order of four to six times the average in-situ overburden pressure. This significant deviation from the current simulation results can be attributed to two factors, namely, the single key stratum structure in the overlying strata in the present simulation, and the relatively small main roof first weighting interval (28 m). Fig. 9 also shows that there is only a small increase in the maximum abutment pressure when the longwall face advances between 14 and 22 m. This is directly related to the forcetransmitting ability of the immediate roof. When the longwall face advanced by 14 m, the two lower layers of the immediate roof first caved, and a stable three hinged arch structure was formed at the top layer of the immediate roof. At an advancement of 22 m, the top layer of the immediate roof also caved, with a consequent loss of its weight effect on the abutment pressure. At an advancement of 28 m, the entire thickness of the overburden stratum was cut down along the faceline, causing a drastic drop in the abutment pressure.
Fig. 9. Abutment pressure with respect to the advancement distance.
Fig. 10. Dynamic evolution of overlying strata during the main roof periodic weighting. (a) Stable immediate roof. (b) Gradual loss of the force-transmitting ability of the immediate roof. (c) Elimination of the constraint that restricted the step-from subsidence of the ruptured rock block. (d) Step-form subsidence of the ruptured rock block.
5.2. Main roof periodic weighting 
5.2.1. Evolution of roof bearing structure 
The main roof periodic weighting arrived when the face had advanced 38.8 m. Fig. 10 shows the strata movement at different stages in response to the main roof periodic weighting. The responsive strata movement can be summarized by the following three stages: gradual loss of the force-transmitting ability of the immediate roof, elimination of the constraint that restricted the step-from subsidence of the ruptured rock block, and step-form subsidence of the ruptured rock block. Prior to the advancement of the longwall face by 38.8 m, the suspended length of the hard H3 layer was small, and the layer bore the load of those above it, preventing the development of fracture F1. However, further advancement of the face caused the H3 layer to gradually bend and compress the immediate roof, which gradually broke down, resulting in an increase in the suspended length of the H3 layer. The increase in the suspended length of the H3 layer and the forward movement of the support jointly promoted the deeper propagation of fracture F1 through H3 layer at an advancement of 38.8 m. There was also a tensile fracture F3 at the front of the faceline. The shape of the ruptured rock block was similar to that of a rock pillar, as shown in Fig. 10. The ruptured rock block was very thick and its fragmentation degree (length/thickness) was within 0.55–0.65, which is consistent with the indications of physical modelling. In the initial stage of the periodic weighting, the immediate roof was stable and transferred the overburden load to the front coal mass and the support, as shown in Fig. 10(a). 
With the rotation of rock pillar ① toward the goaf, the immediate roof gradually lost its stability and the ability to transfer the overburden load. The contact force chain in Fig. 10(b) shows that the rotation and subsidence of rock pillar ① is constrained by rock pillar ②, the immediate roof, and the piles of the caved rock. Stress concentration occurred just above the faceline. At this moment, the rock pillar ① was about to undergo step-form subsidence. Under the rotation and sagging of rock pillar ①, fracture F1 gradually developed into a fracture zone with a width of about 2 m, and there were tensile shear cracks running through the pillar. 
The step-form subsidence constraints on both sides of rock pillar ① were weakened by the formation of the fracture zone (Fig. 10(c)) and the free space (Fig. 10(d)) created by the fall of the caved rock piles that contacted the left side of the pillar. This caused the pillar to sag. At the latter stage, the two sides of rock pillar ① were barely affected by any force. The pillar was eventually cut down along the faceline, with the occurrence of an obvious step-form subsidence, as shown in Fig. 10(d). The characteristics of the main roof periodic weighting in the current simulation were basically consistent with the physical modelling and field observations of the surface fractures as shown in Fig. 8(d) and (e).
The recorded support resistance and the vertical displacement of the support during the main roof periodic weighting shown in Fig. 11 provide significant insight and can be used to understand how strata movement translates to the support resistance well. Overall, the support resistance curve reveals a decreasing type, which indicates that the immediate roof was extremely weak. The support resistance curve and support vertical displacement curve in Fig. 11 are each divided into four segments based on the strata movement at different stages during main roof periodic weighting. The support begins to set in the first segment under a setting load 2700 kN. There are no signs of equilibrium being achieved between support and the immediate roof with respect to the vertical displacement of the support. At this moment, the immediate roof is stable and can efficaciously transfer the overburden load to the support and front coal mass. During the gradual adaptation of the support to the strata movement, the immediate roof is subjected to compressive loading and unloading by the asynchronous movement between the support and the main roof, and this tends to break the immediate roof. The immediate roof thus gradually loses its force-transmitting ability in the second segment. Due to the gradual loss of stability of the immediate roof, the support canopy moves up and further compresses the immediate roof, resulting in the support resistance becoming unstable. In the third segment, the immediate roof has almost completely lost its forcetransmitting ability. The rapid decrease of support resistance at this stage is directly related to the integrity of the immediate roof. Consequently, rock pillar ① loses its support and begins to sag downward along fracture F1, resulting in the development of a fracture zone from fracture F1. At the end of the third segment, the broken immediate roof does not attain a compact equilibrium state although 
the vertical displacement of the support canopy reaches 19.3 cm. This upward movement of the support canopy is considered to represent the full supporting height. The position of the support canopy clump was thus fixed at this moment in the simulation, and the setting support stage was completed under a low setting force of about 1000 kN. The low setting force and uncompact immediate roof had no effect on the step-form subsidence of rock pillar ①. The step-form subsidence of rock pillar ① thus occurs in the fourth segment. The foregoing indicates that the variation of the support resistance is closely related to the strata movement.
Fig. 11. Support resistance and support vertical displacement during the main roof periodic weighting.
Fig. 12. Roof step-form subsidence along a longwall face.
5.2.2. Support capacity determination 
Based on field observations, physical modelling, and the present simulation, the characteristics of main roof periodic weighting briefly consist of cut down of the entire thickness of the overlying strata along the faceline, and propagation of major fractures over the ground surface. Roof step-form subsidence along a longwall face is a very dangerous phenomenon. A model of the phenomenon is shown in Fig. 12, from which it is evident that the movement of rock pillar ② determines the support resistance. 
In analysis of the established model, the following assumptions are made: (1) The immediate roof is capable of effectively transferring the overburden load, (2) Rock pillars ①, ②, and ③ are rectangles, (3) Rock pillar ③ has completely collapsed, (4) Rock pillars ② and ③ are in equilibrium, (5) There is no separation of the layers of rock pillar ②, (6) The squeezing force T32 is perpendicular to the right fracture face of rock pillar ②, and = F μT 32 32, where μ is the friction coefficient at the interaction surface between rock pillars ② and ③. Following are some relevant symbols and definitions: θ: rotation angle of rock pillar ②, ′= + θ θ π Lh (180/ )arctan( / ) 2 , L2: length of rock pillar ②, h: thickness of rock pillar, L: length of immediate roof, G2: weight of rock pillar ②, R2: force exerted by the immediate roof on rock pillar ②, qu: unconsolidated quaternary layer load, γ: bulk density of the immediate roof, Dc: center distance of the powered support, Δ: vertical distance between the left and right contact positions of rock pillar ② with rock pillars ① and ③, =− − − ∑ Δh M k h ( ( 1) ), M: mining height, k: bulking factor of immediate roof, and ∑ h: thickness of the immediate roof. 
The force balance in the vertical direction of rock pillar ② is given by Eq. (11):
#E
Rock pillar ② is in rotation balance and the total moment at point O is 0(∑ MO = 0):
#E
R2 can be obtained from Eqs. (11) and (12):
#E
The support resistance can thus be obtained as follows:
#E
Using Dc= 1.5 m, L= 4 m, μ= 0.5, L2 = 12 m, Δ = 12.32 m, h= 15.4 m and θ= 0–15° in Eq. (14), we obtain a reasonable support capacity of 13,759 – 15,405 kN, maximum subsidence of rock pillar ② of 3.11 m, and a support shrinkage of 1.04 m with θ =15°. 
5.3. Comparison of numerical model with physical model and fifield observation 
Table 5 presents the strata movement characteristics of the present numerical model, the physical model, and as observed in the field between the first caving of the immediate roof and the main roof periodic weighting. It can be seen from the table that the strata movements of the present numerical model are basically consistent with those of the physical model and field observations. The abutment pressure concentrated coefficient in Table 5 is the ratio of the maximum front abutment pressure to the in-situ overburden pressure. The differences among the magnitudes of the strata movements in the present simulation, physical model, and field observations are mainly due to the differing material properties, compensation loads, and monitoring systems. Owing to the friction effects between the model and the clapboards of similar simulation test beds, the compensation load applied to the top of the physical model is often greater than the theoretical value. The magnitude of the compensation load is directly related to the aggregates and cement used to produce similar materials and often chosen based on experience due to the friction coefficients between the different similar materials and the test bed clapboards are often varied. The stress fields of the present numerical model and physical model are thus not exactly consistent. In addition, the geometric similarity ratio is often higher than 50 and the diameter of earth pressure box is usually about 3.5 cm, and this may affect the accuracies of the similar material properties and the measured stresses. Furthermore, the good contact between the support canopy and the immediate roof and the full setting load of 2700 kN in the present simulation may not be consistent with the field conditions. In the present simulation, the immediate roof was too broken to transfer the overburden load to the support and front coal mass, even under the upward compression of the full support displacement of 19.3 cm during the main roof periodic weighting. The ruptured rock block was eventually cut down along the rear edge of the support canopy, resulting in a support resistance of 500–2700 kN, which is inconsistent with the actual support resistance of 3300–3819 kN.
Table 5 
Strata movement comparisons.
6. Conclusions 
The single key stratum structure in the overlying strata is the geological origin of roof step-form subsidence during longwall mining in the Shendong shallow coal seam. The thick unconsolidated sand layer forces the entire thickness of the strata to move simultaneously, with the key stratum bearing the full overburden load. The key stratum is close to the coal seam and it is difficult to maintain the stability of its 
hinged structure under the full overburden load; hence the inducement of step-form subsidence. 
The cut down of the entire thickness of the overlying strata along the faceline during the main roof first weighting is a dynamic evolutionary process. The hard layer near the coal seam acts as the key stratum by controlling the movement of the overlying strata, and its instability causes the mining-induced fractures to propagate toward the upper layers. Because the upper layers cannot bear the overburden load, they break down with the collapse of the key stratum, with the mining-induced fractures propagating over the ground surface. 
The overlying strata breaks down in the form of a rock pillar and the step-form subsidence occurs during the periodic weighting. The fragmentation degree of the rock pillar (length/thickness) is within 0.55–0.65, which does not meet the requirement for the formation of a voussoir beam, namely, for which the length of the ruptured rock blocks must be more than twice the thickness. The voussoir beam theory is thus not applicable to this case. 
Based on the equation of the support resistance, the reasonable support capacity is 13,759–15,405 kN for a ruptured rock pillar rotation angle of 0–15°, while the support shrinkage is 1.04 m with a rock pillar rotation of 15°. The yield load of 3500 kN selected based on traditional longwall mining is thus not reasonable. 
The variation of the support resistance is closely related to the strata movement. The simulation support resistance may or may not be consistent with the actual value because of two factors, namely, the difficulty of determining the relative subsidence velocities between the immediate roof and the support canopy, and the difference of the contact between the immediate roof and the support canopy in the field and the present simulation, during which good contact between the immediate roof and support canopy clump was observed, whereas this may not be the case in the field. 
Everything being exactly the same, the bulking factor significantly affects the strata movement, because it determines the height of the caved zone. In general, the farther the strata is from the coal seam top, the easier the force-transmitting beams are formed in the upper strata. Compared with true rock mass, the effect of the relatively small bulking factor of the circular PFC2D particle assembly used in the present study on the movement of the overlying strata in response to longwall mining is neglected. This is due to the following: (i) There are at most two disturbance zones in the overburden strata (i.e., the caved zone and the fractured zone), (ii) The key stratum that controls the movement of the entire strata thickness lies directly on the immediate roof, (iii) The cover depth of the Daliuta 1203 longwall face is shallow, (iv) The bulking factor of the immediate roof is within 1.22–1.26. We plan to incorporate the effect of the bulking factor on the movement of the strata in response to longwall mining in other geological environments, as part of our further work. 
Acknowledgments 
This study was supported by the opening project of State Key Laboratory of Explosion Science and Technology (Beijing Institute of Technology) (Grant no. KFJJ17-09M) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 51374046).